ingress: Add gateway-api enhancement (#1303)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator.md

---
title: gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator
authors:
  - Miciah
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
api-approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2022-12-13
last-updated: 2022-12-13
tracking-link:

>   - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1105

Reviewer: Isn't this also an EP for:
https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1107
https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1108
Or are you envisioning them being separate EPs?

Author: I intend for this EP to cover all three.  Maybe I should just link to the epic?

Author: It is a list.  I'll list all three (NE-1105, NE-1107, and NE-1108).

reconfigure the mesh or ingress, respectively, in the subsequent step.

_"As a project admin, I want to configure ingress to my application using an
HTTPRoute, the same way I would use an OpenShift Route."_

Once the cluster admin has configured a Gateway as described in the earlier user
story, the project admin can define an HTTPRoute that attaches to the Gateway.
For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: http
  namespace: example-app
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    namespace: openshift-ingress
  hostnames: ["test.gwapi.example.com"]
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: example-app
      port: 8080
```

This example exposes the "example-app" service, using port 8080 of the service.
In this example, the HTTPRoute specifies a host name that matches both listeners
on the Gateway, so the application is exposed using both HTTP and HTTPS.  When a
client connects to the application using HTTPS, the default certificate that the
cluster admin specified on the Gateway is used.  The Envoy proxy terminates the
TLS connection and forwards the HTTP connection to the "example-app" service.

### Goals

> * Automate the installation of Istio/Envoy by means of OpenShift Service Mesh.

Author: ```suggestion
* Automate the installation of Istio/Envoy as a Red Hat-supported solution by means of OpenShift Service Mesh.
```

Author: Fair point.  I have changed it to "a Gateway API implementation for OpenShift based on Istio/Envoy".

* Enable cluster admins to configure ingress using Gateway and GatewayClass.
* Enable project admins to configure ingress to an application using HTTPRoute.
* Allow cleartext HTTP and edge-terminated HTTPS traffic.
* Manage a LoadBalancer-type service and wildcard DNS for ingress.
* Use a unified control-plane (i.e. a single Istiod deployment) for ingress and mesh.
* Work harmoniously with OpenShift Service Mesh for service mesh use-cases.
* Provide a default security policy, which the cluster admin may modify.

> ### Non-Goals

Author: > Should we add non-goals for things we are planning to do later?

Yes, if a reasonable person would wonder whether it might be part of the enhancement, then the goals and non-goals should specify whether or not it is.  

>     * Convert Route to Gateway API

I'll add this as a non-goal.  

>     * Ingress Canary for Gateway API

I'll add this too.  

>     * Any secret/cert management implications? (C-I-O) does a lot of cert management type things (like default cert and rotating).

Does the following already cover it?

> OpenShift does not automatically generate a default certificate for a Gateway; the cluster admin must do this.

> ### Non-Goals

Reviewer: Sounds good.

> > Does the following already cover it?
> 
> OpenShift does not automatically generate a default certificate for a Gateway; the cluster admin must do this.

Yea I think that generally covers it.

by logic that reconciles Gateway objects.

The initial enhancement will support a subset of the options that are available
with the IngressController API.  In particular, using a LoadBalancer-type
service will be supported; using a NodePort-type service or host networking will
not.

#### DNS Management Logic

The Ingress Operator defines a DNSRecord CRD and a DNS controller that
reconciles DNSRecords.  Before this enhancement, this controller required that
each DNSRecord have an associated IngressController and be in the
"openshift-ingress-operator" namespace, alongside its IngressController.

To add DNS management for Gateway API, the DNS controller must allow a DNSRecord
to be associated with a Gateway (not an IngressController) and be in the same
namespace as its Gateway.  This is a relatively minor change.

#### Controller to manage Gateway API CRDs and OpenShift Service Mesh

This enhancement adds a new controller to do the following:

1. Create the gatewayclasses CRD.
2. Reconcile GatewayClasses by installing OSSM and other CRDs when appropriate.
3. Reconcile Gateways by configuring OSSM, services, and DNS.

> This controller creates the gatewayclasses CRD when it starts, which enables the

Author: I'll add an open question and a link to that section.

3. The cluster admin creates a Gateway, specifying the desired listeners, the secret from Step 2, and the GatewayClass from Step 1.
4. The project admin creates an HTTPRoute, specifying the desired host name, the Gateway from Step 3, and the target service in the project admin's namespace.
5. The service end-user connects to the host name specified in the HTTPRoute from Step 4 and receives a response from the service that the HTTPRoute targets.

### API Extensions

This enhancement imports the v1beta1 versions of the following CRDs into OpenShift:

* [GatewayClass](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/gatewayclass/).
* [Gateway](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/gateway/).
* [HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/api-types/httproute/).

Before this enhancement, DNSRecord CRs were not reconciled unless they were in
the "openshift-ingress-operator" namespace and had an associated
IngressController.  This enhancement enables reconciliation of DNSRecord CRs in
the "openshift-ingress" namespace.

This enhancement adds a controller that creates DNSRecord CRs for specially

> annotated services in the "openshift-ingress" namespace.  This controller is

Reviewer: How does this annotation get on the service? Do cluster-admins have to manually annotate the service? Or is the C-I-O somehow annotating the service from derived information? Could we talk to that a bit here?

Have we considered External DNS's design https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/external-dns/blob/master/docs/tutorials/gateway-api.md in which they utilize the hostname on the `xRoute` objects. And for UDPRoute and TCPRoute that don't use hostnames in the spec, you add an annotation?

Author: > How does this annotation get on the service? 

C-I-O adds it.  I'll elaborate in the text.  

> Have we considered External DNS's design https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/external-dns/blob/master/docs/tutorials/gateway-api.md in which they utilize the hostname on the `xRoute` objects. And for UDPRoute and TCPRoute that don't use hostnames in the spec, you add an annotation?

Yes; this is [NE-1016](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1016).  I'd like for us to explore this option, but we don't have capacity to prioritize it.

Author: I'll mention NE-1016 in "Alternatives" though.

Author: Actually, using the annotation doesn't make sense if we want a DNS record for each Gateway listener host name, and why wouldn't we want that?  It makes more sense to have cluster-ingress-operator watch gateways and create a DNSRecord CR for each host name specified in any listener for which the Gateway specifies the istio-ingressgateway service.  This complicates the controller logic, but not too much, I think.  What do you think?

used to configure DNS for the LoadBalancer-type service associated with a
Gateway.

> Tentatively, this enhancement may define an additional CRD for specifying

Reviewer: I'm assuming this type of wording should be removed and clarified in the final draft of this EP. In other words, should we figure this out before merging the EP?

Author: Correct.  We should strive to clarify this before merging the EP.

We have several constraints related  design and release-timing constraints to consider.

#### Ownership of the ServiceMeshControlPlane

OpenShift Service Mesh is configured through the ServiceMeshControlPlane CR,
both for ingress use-cases and for mesh use-cases.  [The existing installation
procedure for Service
Mesh](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.11/service_mesh/v2x/ossm-create-smcp.html#ossm-control-plane-deploy-cli_ossm-create-smcp)
instructs the reader to create a ServiceMeshControlPlane named "basic" in the
"istio-system" namespace.  To ensure backwards compatibility, the Ingress
Operator must do one of the following:

* Use the same name and namespace: "istio-system/basic".
* Migrate an existing SMCP from "istio-system" to "openshift-ingress".
* Provide an API to tell the Ingress Operator what SMCP to use.

Placement, possible migration, and ownership of the ServiceMeshControlPlane need
to be clarified in this enhancement.  This is an open design question.

#### Managing the ServiceMeshMemberRoll

OSSM 2.3 only watches resources in namespaces specified in an
ServiceMeshMemberRoll CR associated with the ServiceMeshControlPlane.  We hope

> that this limitation will be removed from OSSM in time for this enhancement;

Reviewer: I think https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSSM-924 is where Daniel is doing his prototyping work for this.

OpenShift Service Mesh and Istio have a feature called [automated
deployment](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/gateway-api/#automated-deployment)
that creates an Envoy deployment and service for each Gateway.  Enabling
automated deployments and also allowing arbitrary users to create Gateways would
create a new attack surface for untrusted cluster users.  For this reason, the
default policy allows only cluster admins to create Gateways.

### Drawbacks

OpenShift router is a robust, mature, feature-rich, well understood ingress
solution based on an extremely performant proxy (HAProxy).  In contrast,
OpenShift Service Mesh, Istio, and Envoy are disadvantaged in all these
respects.  However, OpenShift router and OpenShift Service Mesh can co-exist on
the same cluster, and OpenShift router remains the default ingress solution for
the time being.  Moreover, Istio and Envoy enjoy rapid community adoption, as
does Gateway API.  Using Istio's Gateway API implementation aligns OpenShift's
ingress solution with its mesh solution with both using Istio/Envoy and also
aligns with the community uptake of Gateway API as the standard lowercase-"i"

> ingress API.

Reviewer: I'm sure there will be drawbacks to talk about regarding unified control plane once we get a more finalized design (i.e. I'm willing to bet C-I-O has to make assumptions when installing ServiceMeshControlPlane or how to use an existing ServiceMeshControlPlane), but I'll just leave this here as a reminder.

Also there might be drawbacks of using the same operator to accomplish both Route and Gateway API.

Author: Yeah, we'll probably find more challenges with having a unified control-plane as we go.  

I don't think using the same operator is a drawback.  At a conceptual level, cluster-ingress-operator is what the name says: it's the operator that manages ingress for the cluster.  There's no reason it cannot have one controller (or set of controllers) for IngressController and another controller (or set of controllers) for Gateway API, and there is enough commonality (e.g. DNS management) that I believe using the same operator is a significant advantage.

---
title: gateway-api-with-cluster-ingress-operator
authors:
  - Miciah
reviewers:
  - TBD
approvers:
  - TBD
api-approvers:
  - TBD
creation-date: 2022-12-13
last-updated: 2022-12-13
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-1105
---

# Gateway API with Cluster Ingress Operator

This enhancement describes changes to the [Ingress
Operator](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator) to manage the
OpenShift Service Mesh Operator in order to enable Gateway API for ingress
use-cases.

## Summary

The Ingress Operator is extended to install and manage the Gateway API CRDs and
the OpenShift Service Mesh Operator, which manages Istio and Envoy.  This new
capability of the Ingress Operator enables a cluster admin to configure
Istio/Envoy using Gateway API's GatewayClass and Gateway custom resources and
enables project admins to configure Envoy using Gateway API's HTTPRoute custom
resource.  (In the future, other Gateway API custom resources will be supported

> as APIs stabilize and Istio adds support for them.)  The end result is a

Author: I don't want to suggest that we are creating a new operator separate from cluster-ingress-operator or the Service Mesh operator, and in my view, the end result is a combination of these operators.  What do you want to convey by replacing "the end result" with "the resulting operator"?  Maybe there is another phrasing that would convey the points I mentioned as well as what it is that you want to convey.

> as APIs stabilize and Istio adds support for them.)  The end result is a

Reviewer 2: I wanted to convey that the end result was still an operator, and not so much a "comprehensive turnkey solution", which seems like so much more than an operator.  This is a nit, really.

comprehensive turnkey solution very much like what is possible today using
OpenShift's IngressController and Route APIs but with the advantage of using the

> up-and-coming Kubernetes community standard API for configuring cluster ingress.

Author: I changed the text to "Gateway API, which is the up-and-coming Kubernetes community standard API for
configuring cluster ingress"; is that all right?

## Motivation

Ingress is a fractured ecosystem.  Red Hat provides a comprehensive but
OpenShift-specific solution, in the form of our Ingress Operator and OpenShift
router and the corresponding IngressController and Route APIs.  Other vendors
and community projects offer alternative APIs and ingress controller
implementations.  Kubernetes does have a standard Ingress API, but the API is

> anemic, and implementations thereof are rife with implementation-specific

Author: How about "rudimentary"?

extensions to fill in missing functionality.  Gateway API mends this fractured
ecosystem by providing a comprehensive and portable API with broad community and
vendor support through numerous implementations.  Istio is a leading
implementation of Gateway API, in addition to being OpenShift's standard
implementation for service mesh.  Integrating Ingress Operator and Service Mesh
Operator enables OpenShift to provide an ingress solution that aligns with the
community that has coalesced around Gateway API as well as the existing
technology on which OpenShift Service Mesh is based.

### User Stories

_"As a cluster admin, I want to configure a Gateway so that I can enable project
admins to configure ingress to their applications, using HTTPRoute resources."_

The cluster admin can configure a Gateway with the following three steps:

1. Create a GatewayClass with `spec.controllerName: openshift.io/gateway-controller`.
2. Create a secret with a default certificate.
3. Create a Gateway with listeners for HTTP and HTTPS, using the secret from Step 2 and the GatewayClass from Step 1.

> The Ingress Operator and OpenShift Service Mesh Operator handle all the details

Author: Done.

of configuring Envoy, provisioning a load balancer, and configuring DNS,
providing a turnkey ingress solution that immediately enables project admins to
publish their applications using the Gateway that the cluster admin has created.

For example, the cluster admin can use the following GatewayClass manifest:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: GatewayClass
metadata:
  name: openshift-default
spec:
  controllerName: openshift.io/gateway-controller
```

Then the cluster admin must create a secret with the default certificate:

```shell
oc -n openshift-ingress create secret tls gwapi-wildcard --cert=wildcard.crt --key=wildcard.key
```

Finally, the cluster admin can use a Gateway manifest like the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway

>   namespace: openshift-ingress

Author: I'll add an open question, but we'll probably go with "openshift-ingress", at least for dev preview or until we identify a compelling reason not to.

>   namespace: openshift-ingress

Reviewer 2: One compelling reason is that we might delay the encounter with possible issues with cross-namespace traffic. That has its own pros and cons.

spec:
  selector:                                                         # (1)
    istio: ingressgateway
  gatewayClassName: istio                                           # (2)
  addresses:
  - value: istio-ingressgateway.openshift-ingress.svc.cluster.local # (3)
    type: Hostname
  listeners:
  - name: http
    hostname: "*.gwapi.example.com"
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: All
  - name: https
    hostname: "*.gwapi.example.com"
    port: 443
    protocol: HTTPS
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - name: gwapi-wildcard
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: All
```
[1]: The requirement to specify `selector.istio` is an Istio-ism that needs to be investigated. \
[2]: The requirement to specify `gatewayClassName: istio ` is another Istio-ism that is addressed by \
     [istio/istio#38134](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/38134) and \
     [istio/istio#41884](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/41884). \
[3]: The requirement to specify the "istio-ingressgateway" service's DNS name \
     in `spec.addresses` is another Istio-ism that needs to be discussed.

> Then a project admin can attach an HTTPRoute to the Gateway.

Author: What authorization does this refer to?  The example gateway specifies `allowedRoutes.namespaces.from: All`, so all project admins are authorized in that sense.  If you're thinking about the ServiceMeshMemberRole CR, I'm hoping we don't need that CR if we specify `spec.techPreview.controlPlaneMode: ClusterScoped` on the ServiceMeshControlPlane (more details in Open Questions).

> _"As a cluster admin, I want to configure ingress using Gateway API, and I want

Author: Is the intention just to make the use-cases more distinct from one another, or is the ordering important?  I've added some headings; is that sufficient?

to enable application owners to configure mesh using the Istio API, and I want
these two things to work harmoniously."_

> The goals of this enhancement include that ingress and mesh use a unified

Author: I consider having a unified control-plane to be an overarching goal for the enhancement.  Would it be potentially confusing to say here that it is a goal for the user story?

> The goals of this enhancement include that ingress and mesh use a unified

Reviewer 2: The unified control-plane is actually a goal for a future release.  It probably deserves its enhancement proposal, or at least its own distinct user story.

> control-plane (with a single Istiod instance).  The cluster admin should be able

Author: This is the first mention of a unified control-plane (I try to expand initialisms and define OSSM-specific terms the first time I use them within each section).  Maybe it would be better to avoid using the term "Istiod".  Is "Istio control-plane deployment" good?

to enable mesh and subsequently enable ingress or vice versa without needing to
reconfigure the mesh or ingress, respectively, in the subsequent step.

_"As a project admin, I want to configure ingress to my application using an
HTTPRoute, the same way I would use an OpenShift Route."_

Once the cluster admin has configured a Gateway as described in the earlier user

> story, the project admin can define an HTTPRoute that attaches to the Gateway.

Reviewer 2: Here you could reference the title of the user story, since they aren't numbered.

For example:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: HTTPRoute
metadata:
  name: http
  namespace: example-app
spec:
  parentRefs:
  - name: gateway
    namespace: openshift-ingress
  hostnames: ["test.gwapi.example.com"]
  rules:
  - backendRefs:
    - name: example-app
      port: 8080
```

This example exposes the "example-app" service, using port 8080 of the service.

> In this example, the HTTPRoute specifies a host name that matches both listeners

Author: I write "Gateway" when I'm referring to the object or kind or "gateways" when I'm referring to the API resource.  Here, I'm referring loosely to the logical listeners.  There isn't any "Listeners"/"listeners" kind or resource, but I could write ``` both entries in the `listeners` field ``` to tie it to the yaml definition; would that make the meaning clearer?

on the Gateway, so the application is exposed using both HTTP and HTTPS.  When a
client connects to the application using HTTPS, the default certificate that the
cluster admin specified on the Gateway is used.  The Envoy proxy terminates the

> TLS connection and forwards the HTTP connection to the "example-app" service.

Author: Yeah, that does adds a bit more detail.  I've incorporated the suggestion.  Thanks!  (I hope no one asks, "What about other options for `tls.mode`?"; then we might need to add details about TLSRoute etc.)

### Goals

* Provide a Red Hat-supported Gateway API implementation based on Istio/Envoy.
* Automate the installation of Istio/Envoy by means of OpenShift Service Mesh.
    * Enable cluster admins to configure ingress using [Gateway](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1.Gateway) and [GatewayClass](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1.GatewayClass).
    * Enable project admins to configure ingress to an application using [HTTPRoute](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/spec/#gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1.HTTPRoute).

>     * Automatically install OSSM when a GatewayClass is created.

Author: I think this is related to the question, "Do we need to integrate with an existing service-mesh control-plane?", right?  We need some clarity on how we'll answer that question before we make integrating with an existing OSSM installation/SMCP a goal.

    * [Policy attachment](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/references/policy-attachment/) is experimental, and so it is not supported at this time.
    * Gateway API uses policy attachment for settings such as retries and timeouts, and so these are not supported.
    * [Backend properties](https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/gep-1282/) are experimental, and so they are not supported at this time.
    * Gateway API defines TLS reencrypt in terms of backend properties, and so reencrypt is not supported at this time.
* Not all features of the IngressController API are supported with Gateway API.
    * OpenShift does not automatically generate a default certificate for a Gateway; the cluster admin must do this.
    * This enhancement does not provide the full set of endpoint publishing options that are available in the IngressController API.
        * Using a NodePort-type service is not supported (but the cluster admin could define one manually).
        * Using host networking is not supported.
    * This enhancement does not monitor Envoy using a canary application.
    * None of the following items can be configured on Envoy at this time:
        * HTTP error pages.

>         * Access logs.

Author: Are they on by default?  OSSM has an option to enable logging, and I figure it's something that the cluster admin could want to configure, but maybe the OSSM option is just for Istio itself and addons, not Envoy.

>         * Access logs.

Reviewer: They are not on by default, but you can turn on with:
https://github.com/gcs278/istio-gateway-api-demo/blob/master/yaml/service-mesh-control-plane.yaml#L16-L21

This is for access logging, I use them in my istio demos. So we may want to remove `Access logs` as a non-goal.

>         * Access logs.

Author: Depending on how we ultimately resolve the "Do we need a new config object?  How can the cluster admin configure OSSM?" question, we may change it from a non-goal to a goal.  Till then, I'd rather err on the side of smaller scope.

        * Pod placement.
        * Allowed TLS version or ciphers.
        * HTTP compression.
        * Client TLS.
        * HTTP `forwarded` header or other HTTP headers.
        * Envoy performance tuning options.
* OpenShift does not provide special support for third-party (non-Red Hat) Gateway API implementations.

>     * OpenShift does not configure LB, DNS, etc. for third-party implementations.

Author: It shouldn't configure LB, DNS, etc. for third-party Istio instances either.

* OpenShift does not support using Istio APIs to configure ingress (but they may still be used to configure mesh).
    * If an Istio feature cannot be configured using Gateway API, that feature is not supported.
* This enhancement does not deprecate OpenShift router or the Route API.
    * OpenShift router remains a standard OpenShift component.
    * Istio/Envoy do not watch Routes or Ingresses.
    * OpenShift does not translate Routes or Ingresses into HTTPRoutes.

## Proposal

Most of the proposed changes are to Ingress Operator.  Some API changes may also
be warranted.

### Changes to the Ingress Operator

With this enhancement, the Ingress Operator is responsible for managing Gateway
API CRDs, installing OpenShift Service Mesh Operator, managing a
LoadBalancer-type service for a Gateway, and managing DNS for the same.  This
requires the following changes:

* Refactor the existing service and DNS management logic to enable its re-use.
* Modify the DNS management logic not to require an associated IngressController.

> * Add a new controller to manage Gateway API CRDs and OpenShift Service Mesh.

Author: I changed this to, "Add a new controller to manage Gateway API CRDs and install and configure Service Mesh Operator."  Does that work?

* Add a new controller to manage DNS for Gateways.

These changes are explained in more detail in the following sections.

#### Refactoring Service and DNS Management

The Ingress Operator is designed around the IngressController API, and much
logic assumes that there is some IngressController object that specifies the
relevant configuration and reports status.  In particular, the operator has
logic for reconciling services and DNS records for an IngressController, which
specifies the desired service type (NodePort, LoadBalancer, or none) and the
desired DNS domain.  This code needs to be refactored so that it can be re-used
by logic that reconciles Gateway objects.

The initial enhancement provides a subset of the options that are available with
the IngressController API.  In particular, using a LoadBalancer-type service is

> supported; using a NodePort-type service or host networking is not.

Author: What do you mean?  This is referring to the Kubernetes service types: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/#publishing-services-service-types

#### DNS Management Logic

The Ingress Operator defines a DNSRecord CRD and a DNS controller that
reconciles DNSRecords.  Before this enhancement, this controller required that
each DNSRecord have an associated IngressController and be in the
"openshift-ingress-operator" namespace, alongside its IngressController.

To add DNS management for Gateway API, the DNS controller must allow a DNSRecord

> to be associated with a Gateway (not an IngressController) and be in the same

Author: I don't intend that a DNSRecord could be associated _both_ with a Gateway _and_ with an IngressController.  Is the wording "as opposed to an IngressController" all right?

namespace as its Gateway.  This is a relatively minor change.

#### Controller to manage Gateway API CRDs and OpenShift Service Mesh

This enhancement adds a new controller to do the following:

1. Create the gatewayclasses CRD.
2. Reconcile GatewayClasses by installing OSSM and other CRDs when appropriate.

> This controller creates the gatewayclasses CRD when it starts, which enables the

Author: The controller installs compatible versions of the CRDs and OSSM.  The CRDs should be backwards compatible.  I suppose there could be an issue if someone installs a newer CRD (say v1) on older OpenShift.  

I've added some text to say that the Ingress Operator effectively owns these CRDs, installs compatible versions of the CRDs and OSSM, and may overwrite the CRDs if a different version is already installed.

  - name: stage-https
    hostname: "*.stage.example.com"
    port: 443
  - name: prod-https
    hostname: "*.prod.example.com"
    port: 443
```

In this configuration, the Gateway specifies that it uses the
"istio-ingressgateway" service and defines three listeners with two different
host names: `*.stage.example.com` and `*.prod.example.com`.  Suppose the
"istio-ingressgateway" has the following service (again, some extraneous details
are abbreviated):

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: istio-ingressgateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:
  ports:
  - name: http
    port: 80
  - name: https
    port: 443
  type: LoadBalancer
status:
  loadBalancer:
    ingress:
    - hostname: lb.example.com
```

Then this new controller creates a DNSRecord for each host name, targeting the
service load-balancer, similar to the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
items:
- apiVersion: ingress.operator.openshift.io/v1
  kind: DNSRecord
  metadata:
    name: example-gateway-9bb4cbc66
    namespace: openshift-ingress
    ownerReferences:
    - apiVersion: v1
      kind: Service
      name: istio-ingressgateway
  spec:
    dnsName: '*.stage.example.com.'
    targets:

>     - lb.example.com

Author: > How does lb.example.com work with a wildcard that is more specific in the labels, such as *.stage.example.com?

"lb" and "stage" are both subdomains of "example.com" in this example.  

> Or, why would you want to use lb.example.com as a target for both protocols and both wildcard names?

When we configure DNS for an IngressController, we use the same target for HTTP and TLS.  Using the same target for both wildcard names means we only need one LB.  Using separate LBs for different subdomains or protocols would cost more on most public clouds and add operational overhead (more LBs to manage) without an obvious benefit.

53 on AWS).

To avoid duplicate DNSRecord CRs, the operator hashes the host name and uses the
hashed value as part of the DNSRecord CR's name.  For example, "9bb4cbc66" is
the hash of "*.stage.example.com", generated similarly to the way [the
Kubernetes deployment controller generates pod template
hashes](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/3f6738b8e6c7f3412ec700c757ae22460cf73e1b/pkg/controller/controller_utils.go#L1157-L1172).

To ensure that DNS records are removed when the corresponding listeners are
removed, the DNSRecord CR specifies an owner reference on the service, and the
controller removes any DNSRecord with such an owner reference and no
corresponding listener.  The DNS controller then deletes the DNS record for the
corresponding DNSRecord CR.

### Workflow Description

1. The cluster admin creates a GatewayClass with `spec.controllerName: openshift.io/gateway-controller`.
2. The cluster admin creates a TLS secret in the "openshift-ingress" namespace with a `*.gwapi.example.com` wildcard default certificate.
3. The cluster admin creates a Gateway, specifying the desired listeners, the secret from Step 2, and the GatewayClass from Step 1.

> 4. The project admin creates an HTTPRoute, specifying the desired host name, the Gateway from Step 3, and the target service in the project admin's namespace.

Author: The "stage" and "prod" names come from the "Controller to manage DNS records for Gateway listeners" example.  The workflow description is consistent with the examples in the user stories.  I've added a note that the workflow description is referring back to those examples.

* Use the same name and namespace: "istio-system/basic".
* Migrate an existing SMCP from "istio-system" to "openshift-ingress".
* Provide an API to tell the Ingress Operator what SMCP to use.

Placement, possible migration, and ownership of the ServiceMeshControlPlane need
to be clarified in this enhancement.  This is an open design question.

#### Managing the ServiceMeshMemberRoll

OSSM 2.3 only watches resources in namespaces specified in an
ServiceMeshMemberRoll CR associated with the ServiceMeshControlPlane; see
[OSSM-924](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSSM-924).  We hope that this
limitation will be removed from OSSM in time for this enhancement; this is an
open release-planning question.  Otherwise, the Ingress Operator or cluster
admin must add each namespace with HTTPRoute objects that Istiod should
reconcile to the ServiceMeshMemberRoll, and the approach we take and ownership
of ServiceMeshMemberRoll need to be clarified in this enhancement; this is an
open design question.

#### Gateway API v1alpha1 CRDs

Istiod fails to become ready if the expected CRDs do not all exist.  OSSM 2.3 is
based on a version of Istio that expects the Gateway API v1alpha1 CRDs to exist.

> In particular, Gateway API v1alpha1 includes the following CRDs that are not
> defined in Gateway API v1beta1: tcproutes, tlsroutes, and udproutes.  For the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In particular, Gateway API v1alpha1 includes the following CRDs that were
not promoted to Gateway API v1beta1: tcproutes, tlsroutes, and udproutes.  For the
```

time being, this means that it is necessary to install the v1alpha1 CRDs in
order for OSSM 2.3 to function. We hope that OSSM will have a new release based

> on a newer version of Istio in time for this enhancement. This is an open

Reviewer 2: Related concern - v1beta1 CRDS may not coexist well with OSSM functionality.

Author: What kind of problems do you anticipate?  The CRDs should be backwards compatible (i.e. the CRDs define both v1beta1 and v1alpha1 versions), and OSSM should ignore CRDs that it doesn't recognize, same as any other component.

release-planning question.

#### Security Policy

> TBD.

Reviewer 2: This should mention roles and verbs for the "default" user policy described in Goal: Provide a default security policy...  and should mention what types of objects may be customized if we decide that the default can be customized.

### Risks and Mitigations

#### Automatic deployments

OpenShift Service Mesh and Istio have a feature called [automated
deployment](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/gateway-api/#automated-deployment)
that creates an Envoy deployment and service for each Gateway.  Enabling
automated deployments and also allowing arbitrary users to create Gateways would
create a new attack surface for untrusted cluster users.  For this reason, the
default policy allows only cluster admins to create Gateways.

> 

Reviewer 2: Another risk is maintaining Release Alignment. We would have to tie features and fixes to specific versions of OSSM if we go to GA without release schedule alignment to OpenShift releases.  E.g. in 4.13 we release with OSSM 2.4, then in OSSM 2.5 a fix is issued that maps to 4.13.5, users will need to upgrade both OpenShift and OSSM.  Backports and downgrades will get complicated as well without release alignment.

Author: That's more or less the issue we're struggling with now (we want to base the enhanced dev preview on OSSM 2.4, but doing so requires OSSM 2.4's release to come before OCP 4.13's feature complete date).  I've added some text to describe the issue.

### Drawbacks

OpenShift router is a robust, mature, feature-rich, well understood ingress
solution based on an extremely performant proxy (HAProxy).  In contrast,
OpenShift Service Mesh, Istio, and Envoy are disadvantaged in all these
respects.  However, OpenShift router and OpenShift Service Mesh can co-exist on
the same cluster, and OpenShift router remains the default ingress solution for
the time being.  Moreover, Istio and Envoy enjoy rapid community adoption, as
does Gateway API.  Using Istio's Gateway API implementation aligns OpenShift's
ingress solution with its mesh solution with both using Istio/Envoy and also
aligns with the community uptake of Gateway API as the standard lowercase-"i"

> ingress API.

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention the Compass decision so that people don't look at this and wonder why we're still doing it?

Author: I don't expect the codename "Compass" means anything outside of Red Hat.  What specifically is important to convey here?  Should I mention alignment Knative/serverless, API gateway, etc. as well?  I've added mention of serverless and API gateway.

## Design Details

### Open Questions

TBD.

As mentioned in the
[User Stories](#user-stories),
[Changes to the Ingress Operator](#controller-to-manage-gateway-api-crds-and-openshift-service-mesh),
[API Extensions](#api-extensions),
[Implementation Details](#implementation-detailsnotesconstraints),
and
[Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
sections, there are several open questions:

> * Do we need a new config object?

Author: I've expanded this section.

requires the following changes:

* Refactor the existing service and DNS management logic to enable its re-use.
* Modify the DNS management logic not to require an associated IngressController.
* Add a new controller to manage Gateway API CRDs and install and configure Service Mesh Operator.
* Add a new controller to manage DNS for Gateways.

These changes are explained in more detail in the following sections.

#### Refactoring Service and DNS Management

The Ingress Operator is designed around the IngressController API, and much
logic assumes that there is some IngressController object that specifies the
relevant configuration and reports status.  In particular, the operator has
logic for reconciling services and DNS records for an IngressController, which
specifies the desired service type (NodePort, LoadBalancer, or none) and the
desired DNS domain.  This code needs to be refactored so that it can be re-used
by logic that reconciles Gateway objects.

The initial enhancement provides a subset of the options that are available with
the IngressController API.  In particular, using a LoadBalancer-type service is
supported; using a NodePort-type service or host networking is not.

> #### DNS Management Logic

Reviewer: *nit* The placement of this `#### DNS Management Logic` paragraph feels a little awkward to me, should it be combined, or adjacent to `#### Controller to manage DNS records for Gateway listeners`? Aren't they doesn't `DNS Management Logic` feed into `Controller to manage DNS records for Gateway listeners`?

Author: I'll make those sections adjacent and modify the title of the section about the DNS controller to make it clearer that it is specific to that controller.  I prefer to keep the two sections distinct (but adjacent) because one describes changes to an existing controller and the other describes the design of a new controller.

SMCP named "basic" in the "istio-system" namespace.  To ensure backwards
compatibility, the Ingress Operator must do one of the following:

* Use the same name and namespace: "istio-system/basic".
* Migrate an existing SMCP from "istio-system" to "openshift-ingress".
* Provide an API to tell the Ingress Operator what SMCP to use.

Placement, possible migration, and ownership of the SMCP need to be clarified in
this enhancement.  This is an open design question.

#### Managing the ServiceMeshMemberRoll

OSSM 2.3 only watches resources in namespaces specified in an
ServiceMeshMemberRoll CR associated with the ServiceMeshControlPlane; see
[OSSM-924](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OSSM-924).  We hope that this limitation will be removed from OSSM in time
for this enhancement; this is an open release-planning question.  Otherwise, the
Ingress Operator or cluster admin must add each namespace with HTTPRoute objects
that Istio should reconcile to the ServiceMeshMemberRoll, and the approach we
take and ownership of ServiceMeshMemberRoll need to be clarified in this
enhancement; this is an open design question.

#### Gateway API v1alpha1 CRDs

> Istio fails to become ready if the expected CRDs do not all exist.  OSSM 2.3 is

Reviewer: Here this paragraph states essentially "OSSM 2.3 won't start without v1alpha1 Gateway API CRDS":
1. Did you mean v1alpha2?
2. Are you saying that OSSM v2.3 only supports v1alpha1? 

OSSM 2.3 has Istio 1.14.3, which has Gateway API v0.4.1, which has v1alpha2 CRDs. It won't start without v1alpha1 CRDs? Just started a OSSM demo with v1alpha2 and v1beta1 versions (v0.5.0 with experimental on, so you get v1alpha2).

Author: I meant v1alpha2, sorry.  I'll fix it.

The cluster admin can always create a custom SMCP and configure it as desired,
but this SMCP would result in a separate control-plane.  Having a unified
control-plane (i.e. a single Istio control-plane deployment for ingress and
mesh) requires using the same SMCP for both, but with the Ingress Operator
managing the SMCP, it isn't practical to permit the cluster admin to configure
these settings directly on the SMCP.

Hence the question: _Do we need a new config CRD, using which the cluster admin
could configure parameters on the SMCP?_

To resolve this question, we must decide how important it is that the cluster
admin be able to configure these parameters for the SMCP that the Ingress
Operator manages, and we might need to devise some general approach for
customizing these parameters.

For the time being, we may defer the ability to customize the parameters
described above and address the question in a followup EP for tech preview.

Introducing a new config CRD would lead to another question: _How would we
expose SMCP parameters without duplicating a significant number of definitions

> from the SMCP CRD?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from the SMCP CRD?_
```

The [Service Mesh control plane profiles](https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.12/service_mesh/v2x/ossm-profiles-users.html#ossm-control-plane-profiles_ossm-profiles-users) is potentially useful to resolve
this last question.  For example, the Ingress Operator could check for a profile
in a well known location, and the cluster admin could put a profile in that
location in order to configure the SMCP that the Ingress Operator manages.

> #### Do we need to integrate with an existing service-mesh control-plane?

Reviewer: Have we explored/outlined a simpler option in which: the ingress operator won't reconcile Gateway API objects until a user manually installs OSSM and a control plane and instructs C-I-O via a new CRD where it is?

Even to use OSSM Istio Service Mesh, you need to manually install OSSM and configure a control plane. This means the c-i-o wouldn't automagically get a Istio Control Plane either. If we have a new custom CRD, that could have configuration information about where the Istio control plane is that you want to use, and it could have a descriptive status to indicate the Istio Control Plane is not installed, or not configured with the C-I-O's minimum requirements for Gateway API.

Just a thought. Suggestions for automation seem to introduce a couple of edge cases, that we don't have the answers to yet.

Author: > Have we explored/outlined a simpler option in which: the ingress operator won't reconcile Gateway API objects until a user manually installs OSSM and a control plane and instructs C-I-O via a new CRD where it is?

That would be simpler for us to implement, but it would make the solution much less turnkey, and it would force the cluster admin to deal with implementation-specific details.  The goal really is that the end user can go to an OpenShift cluster and configure Gateway API (using Gateway API resources), and it just works.  If we get this right, the end user need not be aware of the Istio or OSSM components, configuration, or resources.  

> Even to use OSSM Istio Service Mesh, you need to manually install OSSM and configure a control plane. This means the c-i-o wouldn't automagically get a Istio Control Plane either. If we have a new custom CRD, that could have configuration information about where the Istio control plane is that you want to use, and it could have a descriptive status to indicate the Istio Control Plane is not installed, or not configured with the C-I-O's minimum requirements for Gateway API.

The "Do we need a new config object?  How can the cluster admin configure OSSM?" section touches on this.  We could have some cluster config object with `enableGatewayAPI` and `enableMesh` options.  Ideally the cluster admin shouldn't need to configure anything with "mesh" in the name to get Gateway API installed though.  

I meant to connect the "integrate with an existing service-mesh control-plane" question with the "new config object" question, but I think I lost that connection during editing.  I've just now added a paragraph explaining the connection.

Finally, the cluster admin can use a Gateway manifest like the following:

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Gateway
metadata:
  name: gateway
  namespace: openshift-ingress
spec:
  selector:                                                         # (1)
    istio: ingressgateway
  gatewayClassName: istio                                           # (2)
  addresses:
  - value: istio-ingressgateway.openshift-ingress.svc.cluster.local # (3)
    type: Hostname
  listeners:
  - name: http
    hostname: "*.gwapi.example.com"
    port: 80
    protocol: HTTP
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: All
  - name: https
    hostname: "*.gwapi.example.com"
    port: 443
    protocol: HTTPS
    tls:
      mode: Terminate
      certificateRefs:
      - name: gwapi-wildcard
    allowedRoutes:
      namespaces:
        from: All
```
[1]: The requirement to specify `selector.istio` is an Istio-ism that needs to be investigated. \
[2]: The requirement to specify `gatewayClassName: istio` is another Istio-ism that is addressed by [istio/istio#38134](https://github.com/istio/istio/issues/38134) and [istio/istio#41884](https://github.com/istio/istio/pull/41884). \

> [3]: The requirement to specify the "istio-ingressgateway" service's DNS name in `spec.addresses` is another Istio-ism that needs to be discussed.

Author: We can address both of these issues by using OSSM 2.4.
